>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY JULY 16:
THE TRUMP-PENCE TICKET MAKES IT
DEBUT, JUST TWO DAYS BEFORE THE
REPUBLICAN CONVENTION BEGINS.
A FAILED COUP ATTEMPT IN TURKEY
LEAVES HUNDREDS KILLED,
THOUSANDS ARRESTED, AND MANY
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE STABILITY OF
A U.S. ALLY.
AND FROM NICE, FRANCE: THE
LATEST ON THE INVESTIGATION INTO
THE BASTILLE DAY TRUCK ATTACK.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
HERE IN NEW YORK TODAY,
PRESUMPTIVE REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE DONALD
TRUMP FORMALLY INTRODUCED HIS
RUNNING MATE, INDIANA GOVERNOR
MIKE PENCE.
TRUMP HAD CONFIRMED THE CHOICE
YESTERDAY BUT DELAYED THEIR
FIRST APPEARANCE AS RUNNING
MATES DUE TO THURSDAY NIGHT'S
TERROR ATTACK IN NICE, FRANCE.
THE TWO MEN WILL BE THE CENTER
OF ATTENTION WHEN THE REPUBLICAN
NATIONAL CONVENTION BEGINS ON
MONDAY IN CLEVELAND.
THE NEWSHOUR'S JOHN YANG IS
THERE WITH MORE.
>> I ACCEPT YOUR INVITATION TO
RUN AND SERVE AS VICE PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES.
>> Reporter: JOINING THE TRUMP
CAMPAIGN, INDIANA GOVERNOR MIKE
PENCE WAS QUICK TO PRAISE THE
PRESUMPTIVE REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE.
>> DONALD TRUMP UNDERSTANDS THE
FRUSTRATIONS AND THE HOPES OF
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE LIKE NO
LEADER SINCE RONALD REAGAN.
>> Reporter: PENCE DESCRIBED
TRUMP AS A BUILDER, FIGHTER,
PATRIOT, AND OUTSIDER.
>> WE'RE TIRED OF BEING TOLD
THAT A LITTLE INTELLECTUAL ELITE
IN A FAR DISTANT CAPITAL CAN
PLAN OUR LIVES BETTER FOR US
THAN WE CAN PLAN THEM FOR
OURSELVES.
DONALD TRUMP GETS IT.
>> Reporter: FOR HIS PART, TRUMP
PRAISED PENCE'S RECORD IN PUBLIC
OFFICE AND CALLED HIM "A SOLID
PERSON."
>> MIKE PENCE IS A MAN OF HONOR,
CHARACTER, AND HONESTY.
>> Reporter: PENCE IS 57 YEARS
OLD, MARRIED FOR 31 YEARS, WITH
THREE GROWN CHILDREN.
HE'S AN INDIANA NATIVE WHO WENT
TO COLLEGE AND LAW SCHOOL IN THE
HOOSIER STATE.
HE DESCRIBES HIMSELF AS "A
CHRISTIAN, A CONSERVATIVE, AND A
REPUBLICAN-- IN THAT ORDER."
PENCE SPENT A DOZEN YEARS IN THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, WHERE,
TO LIMIT GOVERNMENT SPENDING, HE
OPPOSED PRESIDENT BUSH'S "NO
CHILD LEFT BEHIND" EDUCATION
REFORM AND EXPANSION OF MEDICARE
DRUG BENEFITS.
ELECTED GOVERNOR IN 2012, PENCE
CUT PERSONAL AND CORPORATE
INCOME TAXES, MANAGED A
$2 BILLION BUDGET SURPLUS, AND
SAW THE STATE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
GO DOWN FROM 8.5% TO 5%, THOUGH
THE NATIONAL AVERAGE IS 4.7%.
MORE NOTABLY, PENCE SIGNED A
STATE LAW ALLOWING BUSINESSES TO
DENY SERVICES TO GAYS, WHICH HE
ROLLED BACK AFTER A NATIONAL
OUTCRY.
HE ALSO SIGNED A LAW RESTRICTING
ACCESS TO ABORTIONS ON THE BASIS
OF RACE, GENDER, OR FETAL
ABNORMALITY.
LIKE SOME REPUBLICAN GOVERNORS,
PENCE AGREED TO EXPAND MEDICAID
UNDER PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
HILLARY CLINTON'S CAMPAIGN HAS
ALREADY TWEETED AND POSTED A WEB
VIDEO ATTACKING PENCE'S RECORD
ON GAY RIGHTS AND ABORTION
RIGHTS.
BUT THE PENCE PICK IS BEING WELL
RECEIVED BY NATIONAL REPUBLICAN
LEADERS AND DELEGATES HERE IN
CLEVELAND.
INDIANA DELEGATE JOHN HAMMOND
HAS KNOWN PENCE SINCE THE 1980s.
>> HE IS VERY LIKABLE.
HE'LL BE A GREAT ASSET
POLITICALLY TO THE TRUMP
ORGANIZATION, AND TO MR. TRUMP
AND HIS CAMPAIGN EFFORTS WITH
THAT SWATH UP THROUGH THE RUST
BELT, BEGINNING WITH
PENNSYLVANIA, OHIO, MICHIGAN,
WISCONSIN, THAT SWEEP, THAT'S SO
IMPORTANT.
I THINK WE'RE GOING TO SEE A
WHOLE SLEW OF PEOPLE THAT HAVE
BEEN APPREHENSIVE ABOUT DONALD
TRUMP AND BRINGING HIM IN AND I
THINK THEY ARE GOING SEE HOW
DONALD TRUMP IS ONE THAT WILL
LISTEN AND WORK WITH PEOPLE AND
THAT WAS WHY HE WAS A GOOD PICK.
>> TODAY, TRUMP SAID ONE REASON
HE PICKED PENCE WAS FOR PARTY
UNITY.
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT REPUBLICAN
PARTY LEADERS HOPE WILL BE ON
DISPLAY HERE IN CLEVELAND NEXT
WEEK.
HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: JOHN, WE SEE
YOU'RE IN THE CONVENTION HALL
NOW.
WE'VE HEARD STORIES ALL WEEK
ABOUT WHAT KIND OF SECURITY
CONCERNS.
HOW HARD WAS IT GETTING THERE?
HAS THE CITY CHANGED WHEN IT
COMES TO THE PREPARATIONS?
>> Reporter: THIS AREA HAS
CHANGED.
THE CLOSEST WE COULD COME IN A
VEHICLE WAS ABOUT FOUR BLOCKS
AWAY.
THIS ENTIRE ARENA HAS BEEN
ENCIRCLED BY STEEL BARRICADES,
AND A BROADER PART OF THE
DOWNTOWN CLEVELAND AREA IS A
SECURITY AREA.
FEDERAL OFFICIALS ALONE, AGENTS,
OFFICERS, 30,000 HERE IN
CLEVELAND FOR THIS CONVENTION,
AND THAT DOESN'T COUNT LOCAL
POLICE WHO ARE BEEFED UP BY
POLICE FORCES AROUND THE
MIDWEST.
>> Sreenivasan: JOHN YANG
REPORTING FOR US FROM CLEVELAND.
THANKS.
>> THANKS, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE ARE 2,472
DELEGATES TO THE REPUBLICAN
CONVENTION, AND THERE MAY BE AS
MANY OPINIONS OF THE TRUMP-PENCE
TICKET.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JEFF
GREENFIELD IS IN CLEVELAND WITH
A SAMPLING OF THOSE VIEWS AND A
PREVIEW OF THE FOUR-DAY
GATHERING.
>> Reporter: THERE'S A GOOD
REASON WHY THE ROCK 'N ROLL HALL
OF FAME IS IN CLEVELAND.
IT WAS HERE, ON WJW AM RADIO IN
THE EARLY 1950s, THAT DISC
JOCKEY ALAN FREED BEGAN PLAYING
RECORDS THAT INTRODUCED A
GENERATION-- WHITE AS WELL AS
BLACK-- TO THE MUSIC THAT HAS
EVOLVED AND ENDURED.
BUT WHEN ROCK MUSIC FIRST HIT
MAINSTREAM AMERICA SOME SIX
DECADES AGO, IN CLEVELAND FIRST,
THEN ACROSS THE COUNTRY-- IT WAS
AN INTENSELY POLARIZING FORCE.
>> ROCK AND ROLL HAS GOT TO GO!
>> Reporter: LIBERATING,
EMPOWERING TO SOME, DANGEROUS,
MALEVOLENT TO OTHERS.
NEXT WEEK, ANOTHER POLARIZING
FORCE ARRIVES IN CLEVELAND.
>> WE ARE IN A RIGGED, RIGGED
SYSTEM.
>> Reporter: A CANDIDATE WHOSE
PAST-- AND PATH TO THE
NOMINATION-- IS UNLIKE ANY EVER
CHOSEN BY EITHER MAJOR PARTY.
JO ANN DAVIDSON IS A NATIONAL
COMMITTEEWOMAN FROM OHIO, WHO
ATTENDED HER FIRST CONVENTION AS
A DELEGATE FOR GERALD FORD IN
1976.
>> I'VE ALWAYS THOUGHT AMERICANS
WANTED KIND OF THE GARY COOPER
TYPE, THE JOHN WAYNE TYPE.
DON'T SAY MUCH, BUT YOU DO MUCH.
YOU DON'T BRAG ON YOURSELF
BECAUSE THAT'S NOT WHAT A REAL
LEADER DOES.
TRUMP'S BROKEN ALL OF THOSE
RULES.
>> MAYBE WE'RE MOVING INTO A NEW
SITUATION WITHIN POLITICS WHICH
THE OLD RULES AREN'T GOING TO
APPLY ANYMORE.
AND I THINK THAT'S PROBABLY
WHAT'S ON MANY PEOPLE'S MIND
HERE.
WE HAD TRANSITION CONVENTION.
WE'RE TRANSITIONING TO WHAT
WE'VE ALWAYS THOUGHT ABOUT, YOUR
SORT OF TYPICAL CONVENTIONS, TO
A WHOLE DIFFERENT SETUP.
WE'LL SEE HOW IT GOES.
>> I FEEL I SIMPLY CAN'T VOTE
FOR HIM.
>> Reporter: FOR A SIGNIFICANT
NUMBER OF REPUBLICANS, TRUMP'S
TRIUMPH BRINGS TO MIND JOHN F.
KENNEDY'S ASSERTION THAT
"SOMETIMES PARTY LOYALTY ASKS
TOO MUCH."
18 REPUBLICAN U.S. SENATORS AND
MORE THAN 50 REPUBLICAN MEMBERS
OF THE HOUSE ARE NOT ATTENDING
THE CONVENTION.
EVEN THE HOST GOVERNOR, JOHN
KASICH, IS SKIPPING IT.
MANY ARE STAYING AWAY, BECAUSE
THEY SIMPLY CANNOT SUPPORT THE
NOMINEE.
WHICH IS WHY, AS REPUBLICANS
PREPARE FOR THEIR 41st NATIONAL
CONVENTION, TRUMP'S SUPPORTERS
AND PARTY FOOT SOLDIERS HAVE
WORKED SO HARD TO QUELL INTRA-
PARTY BATTLES.
>> I BELIEVE THAT COMPLETES OUR
WORK ON RULE 12.
>> Reporter: THE SO-CALLED
"NEVER TRUMPERS" ARE GOING OUT
NOT WITH A BANG... BUT A
WHIMPER.
THEIR EFFORTS TO FREE DELEGATES
FROM COMMITMENTS TO SUPPORT
TRUMP'S NOMINATION ON THE FIRST
BALLOT FAILED.
THEY NEEDED 28 VOTES ON THE
RULES COMMITTEE THIS WEEK TO
FORCE A FLOOR FIGHT ON THAT;
THEY GOT 12.
AS FOR TRUMP'S TROUBLES WITH
CONSERVATIVES, WELL-- MORTON
BLACKWELL HAS BEEN AT EVERY GOP
CONVENTION SINCE 1964, WHEN HE
WAS BARRY GOLDWATER'S YOUNGEST
DELEGATE.
>> WELL, THERE'S ALWAYS SOME
PEOPLE WHO HAVE HURT FEELINGS,
DISAPPOINTED AMBITIONS, WHO
DON'T COME TO A CONVENTION.
BUT THE TENDENCY HAS ALWAYS
BEEN, IN MY LIFETIME, FOR THE
PARTY TO UNITE.
>> Reporter: HE SAYS TRUMP'S
CHOICE OF GOVERNOR MIKE PENCE AS
HIS RUNNING MATE SENDS THE RIGHT
MESSAGE.
>> MOVEMENT CONSERVATIVES ARE
GOING TO BE LOOKING FOR THAT
SORT OF THING.
MIKE PENCE IS A CONSERVATIVE
MOVEMENT BUILDER.
>> Reporter: FORMER MICHIGAN
REPUBLICAN PARTY CHAIRMAN SAUL
ANUZIS, WHO'S HERE AS A
DELEGATE, IS A CONSERVATIVE WHO
BACKED SENATOR TED CRUZ IN THE
PRIMARIES.
>> I WOULD HAVE PREFERRED TO
HAVE A MORE CONSERVATIVE
CANDIDATE, SOMEBODY WHO'S
PHILOSOPHICALLY MORE CONSISTENT.
>> Reporter: BUT, LIKE MANY
TRUMP SKEPTICS, ANUZIS SAYS HE
CAN EASILY LIVE WITH TRUMP WHEN
HE CONSIDERS THE ALTERNATIVE.
>> I THINK WHAT DONALD TRUMP HAS
BEEN DOING IS SLOWLY BUILDING
KIND OF A CONSENSUS TO MAKE
CONSERVATIVES AND REPUBLICANS
FEEL BETTER ABOUT WHO HE IS AND
AT LEAST REPRESENT OUR VALUES, A
LOT CLOSER THAN SOMEONE LIKE
HILLARY CLINTON EVER WOULD.
>> Reporter: IN AN ELECTION
WHERE LARGE NUMBERS OF VOTERS
STILL HAVE SERIOUS DOUBTS ABOUT
TRUMP'S TEMPERAMENT AND
STABILITY, THE CONVENTION IS HIS
CHANCE TO DEMONSTRATE A MORE
REASSURING IMAGE.
BEN GINSBERG IS A TOP REPUBLICAN
ELECTION LAWYER WHO ADVISED THE
BUSH AND ROMNEY CAMPAIGNS.
>> THE CONVENTION CAN SHOW THAT
DONALD TRUMP HAS A NUMBER OF
VALIDATORS WHO CAN SPEAK TO THE
CHARACTERISTICS THAT HE WANTS TO
PUT FORWARD.
IF THAT'S DONE WELL, THEN THAT
WILL ENHANCE THE MESSAGE OF
UNITY COMING AND PERHAPS CALM
THE DISSIDENT VOICES.
>> Reporter: THE TRUMP CAMPAIGN
HAS APPARENTLY WON ITS BATTLE
FOR A DISRUPTION-FREE
CONVENTION, BUT THE HARDER
BATTLE WILL TAKE PLACE ONCE IT
ENDS.
CAN TRUMP AND HIS ALLIES
CONVINCE THE SKEPTICS WITHIN THE
REPUBLICAN-CONSERVATIVE
COMMUNITY TO STAND WITH HIM--OR
AT LEAST, NOT OPENLY AGAINST
HIM?
IN THAT EFFORT, THEIR STRONGEST
ARGUMENT WILL BE THE IDENTITY OF
HIS PRESUMPTIVE OPPONENT.
>> Sreenivasan: THE GOVERNMENT
OF TURKEY SAYS IT IS IN FULL
CONTROL OF THE NATION AFTER A
FACTION OF THE MILITARY ROSE UP
AGAINST PRESIDENT RECEP ERDOGAN
LAST NIGHT.
THE CHAOTIC, DEADLY, AND FAILED
MILITARY COUP DEPLOYED TANKS AND
HELICOPTERS TO SHELL AND STRAFE
PARLIAMENT AND OTHER GOVERNMENT
BUILDINGS IN ANKARA AND
ISTANBUL.
BUT RALLIED BY ERDOGAN, WHO IS
UNPOPULAR WITH THE MILITARY FOR
HIS ISLAMIST-ROOTED IDEOLOGY,
LOYAL TROOPS, THE POLICE, AND
THOUSANDS OF HIS CIVILIAN
SUPPORTERS TOOK TO THE STREETS
TO CONFRONT AND BLOCK THE REBEL
SOLDIERS.
TURKEY'S GOVERNMENT SAID AT
LEAST 265 PEOPLE WERE KILLED IN
THE FIGHTING THAT CONTINUED
UNTIL EARLY THIS MORNING.
THAT INCLUDES MORE THAN A
HUNDRED REBELS AND 161 CIVILIANS
AND POLICE OFFICERS, WHILE SOME
1,400 PEOPLE WERE WOUNDED.
THE GOVERNMENT SAYS IT ARRESTED
ALMOST 3,000 OF THE TREASONOUS
SOLDIERS, AND ERDOGAN VOWED THEY
WILL "PAY A HEAVY PRICE" FOR THE
UPRISING.
TODAY, TURKEY'S PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESSED AN EMERGENCY SESSION
OF PARLIAMENT, AS THE FOUR
POLITICAL PARTIES CONDEMNED THE
COUP ATTEMPT, AND THOUSANDS
MARCHED IN SUPPORT OF ERDOGAN'S
GOVERNMENT.
TURKEY ACCUSED A U.S.-BASED
CLERIC, FETHULLAH GULEN, OF
MASTERMINDING THE ATTEMPTED
COUP, AND DEMANDED HIS
EXTRADITION.
SECRETARY OF STATE KERRY SAID
THE UNITED STATES WOULD CONSIDER
A REQUEST FOR EXTRADITION SHOULD
IT BE MADE.
TODAY IN WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT
OBAMA MET WITH HIS NATIONAL
SECURITY TEAM ABOUT TURKEY.
HE LAMENTED THE LOSS OF LIFE AND
EXPRESSED HIS SUPPORT FOR THE
DEMOCRATICALLY ELECTED
GOVERNMENT AND NATO MEMBER.
TURKEY IS A KEY ALLY IN THE
FIGHT AGAINST ISIS IN
NEIGHBORING SYRIA AND IRAQ.
FOR SEVERAL HOURS TODAY, THE
INCIRLIK AIR BASE IN SOUTHERN
TURKEY USED BY AMERICAN
WARPLANES WAS CLOSED.
U.S. AIRLINES HAVE SUSPENDED ALL
FLIGHTS BETWEEN THE U.S. AND
ANKARA AND ISTANBUL.
TO HELP US UNDERSTAND THE EVENTS
IN TURKEY I AM JOINED NOW FROM
WASHINGTON BY ERIC EDELMAN, THE
FORMER U.S. AMBASSADOR TO TURKEY
DURING THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION,
AND HERE IN NEW YORK BY DAVID
PHILLIPS, DIRECTOR OF THE
PROGRAM ON PEACE-BUILDING AND
HUMAN RIGHTS AT COLUMBIA
UNIVERSITY.
MR. EDELMAN, I WANT TO START
WITH YOU.
MOST PEOPLE WATCHING TV LAST
NIGHT SAID, OH, GOSH, THERE'S A
COUP BUT WHAT PRECIPITATED
THIS?
WHY NOW?
WHY DID IT HAPPEN?
>> WELL, HARI, TURKEY IS AN
EXTREMELY DIVIDED AND POLARIZED
SOCIETY, AND THE FORMER PRIME
MINISTER NOW PRESIDENT ERDOGAN
IS AN ENORMOUSLY POLARIZING
FIGURE.
HE HAS BEEN DRIVING THE COUNTRY
IN A DIRECTION OF GREATER
DIVISION BECAUSE OF HIS DESIRE
TO ESTABLISH AN EXECUTIVE
PRESIDENTY.
THERE IS A LOT OF CONCERN ABOUT
HIS AUTOCRATIC RULE AND THOSE
DIVISIONS ALSO APPEAR TO BE
MIRRORED IN THE MILITARY, AND
SOME MEMBERS OF THE MILITARY,
OBVIOUSLY, YESTERDAY DECIDED
TO -- OR EARLIER, BUT ACTIVATED
YESTERDAY A PLAN TO TAKE HIM OUT
OF OFFICE.
>> Sreenivasan: DAVID
PHILLIPS, THIS IS A LONG TIME
COMING?
>> HIS AUTOCRATIC GOVERNANCE HAS
ALIENATED A LARGE SECTOR OF THE
SOCIETY.
THE MILITARY ISSUE SAID THEY
WANTED TO RESTORE CONSTITUTIONAL
ORDER.
RECENTLY TURKEY'S BEEN ATTACKED
BY I.S.I.S. AND SUFFERED
SIGNIFICANT LOSS.
THEIR POLICY IN SYRIA IS
FAILING.
SO IT'S THE ACCUMULATION OF
SEVERAL YEARS' WORTH OF
MISMANAGED ON ERDOGAN'S PART.
>> Sreenivasan: SO ERIC
EDELMAN, WHAT DOES ERDOGAN DO
NOW CONSIDERING HE KNOWS THERE
IS THIS DISSATISFACTION AMONG
THE PUBLIC AND ESPECIALLY INSIDE
THE MILITARY?
>> WELL, HE WAS ABLE TO
YESTERDAY TO RALLY HIS
SUPPORTERS, ABOUT 50% OF THE
PUBLIC, TO COME OUT AND STOP
THIS COUP FROM SUCCEEDING.
I THINK WHAT YOU CAN SEE
HAPPENING ALREADY IS HE'S
DOUBLING DOWN ON SOME OF THE
THINGS DAVID WAS JUST TALKING
ABOUT, THE KIND OF POLICIES HE'S
FOLLOWED UP TO THIS POINT.
HE'S PURGING NOT ONLY THE
MILITARY WHICH HE HAD ALREADY
BEEN DOING FOR SOME PERIOD OF
TIME, BUT HE IS NOW PURGING THE
JUDICIARY AND I THINK YOU'RE
GOING TO SEE A PERIOD OF SOME
TURMOIL INTERNALLY IN TURKEY
WHILE HE TRIES TO USE THIS TO
HIS ADVANTAGE TO ESTABLISH WHAT
HE CALLS AN EXECUTIVE
PRESIDENCY, BUT WHICH MANY
PEOPLE FEAR IS REALLY JUST A
MORE AUTHORITARIAN PERSONALIZED
REGIME IN TURKEY.
>> Sreenivasan: DAVID
PHILLIPS, DOES THIS PLAY RIGHT
INTO HIS INTERESTS IN A WAY,
SAYING HERE ARE ALL THESE BAD
GUYS TRYING TO GET ME OUT OF
OFFICE AND TRYING TO RUIN THE
DEMOCRACY AND I AM GOING TO HAVE
TO TIGHTEN UP SOME THINGS.
>> HE HAS BEEN WARNING A COUP
FOR SOME TIME.
HE'S NOT ACKNOWLEDGING THE
EVENTS OF YESTERDAY.
HE'S CALLING IT A TERRORIST
ACTION.
IN HIS WORLD VIEW HE'S
SURROUNDED BY TERRORISTS, HE'S
DEMONIZED EVERYBODY AND IS PART
OF THE POLARIZATION THAT EXISTS
IN THE COUNTRY.
IF HE PRACTICES A KIND OF
VIKTOR'S JUSTICE PURGING THE
MILITARY, JUDICIARY AND
POTENTIAL OPPONENTS IN THE
POLARIZATION, IT'S GOING TO
BECOME MORE SEVERE AND TURKEY
WILL BE MORE UNSTABLE.
>> Sreenivasan: IT'S ALMOST
IMPOSSIBLE TO UNDERSTATE THE
GEOGRAPHIC IMPORTANCE OF TURKEY.
>> YES, TURKEY IS A PIVOTAL
COUNTRY.
IT'S A N.A.T.O. ALLY.
IT'S ASTRIDE SEVERAL ZONES OF
CONFLICT.
IT'S A BLACK SEA LITERAL STATE
SO IT HAS CONCERNS ABOUT ITS
NEIGHBOR TO NORTH, RUSSIA,
WHAT'S HAPPENED IN UKRAINE, THE
EASIER AND ANNEXATION OF CRIMEA,
BUT IT, OF COURSE, BORDERS IRAN,
IRAQ AND SYRIA.
SO, YOU KNOW, IT SITS ASTRIDE,
YOU KNOW, AN INCREDIBLY
IMPORTANT ZONE OF CONFLICT AND
ONE IN WHICH OUR MILITARY FORCES
ARE CURRENTLY ENGAGED, AND
UNFORTUNATELY I THINK WHAT'S
HAPPENED IN THE U.S. TURKISH
RELATIONSHIP IS ON BOTH SIDES
THERE HAS BEEN AN ASSUMPTION
TURKEY IS TOO BIG, TOO IMPORTANT
TO FAIL AND, AS A RESULT,
THERE'S P BEEN NOT AS MUCH
ATTENTION IN MY VIEW AS SHOULD
HAVE BEEN PAID TO SOME OF THESE
DOMESTIC TURKISH ISSUES DAVID
AND I HAVE BEEN TALKING ABOUT
WITH YOU, HARI.
>> THE ERDOGAN ADMINISTRATION
ADOPTED A POLICY CALLED ZERO
PROBLEMS WITH NEIGHBORS AND IN A
COUPLE OF MONTHS FOUND ITSELF IN
CONFLICT WITH ALMOST ALL ITS
NEIGHBORS AND THOSE CONFLICTS
WERE LARGELY OF ERDOGAN'S
MAKING.
TURKEY HAS HISTORICALLY BEEN A
VALUED MEMBER OF N.A.T.O. BUT IF
N.A.T.O. WERE BEING ESTABLISHED
TODAY BECAUSE ERDOGAN'S NEW
TURKEY IS ISLAMIST,
ANTI-DEMOCRATIC, IT SIMPLY
WOULDN'T QUALIFY FOR MEMBERSHIP.
THERE IS ALSO A LOT OF
DOCUMENTATION ABOUT ERDOGAN'S
SUPPORT FOR JIHADI GROUPS, THE
JIHADI HIGHWAY THAT RAN TO RAQQA
PROVIDED WEAPONS, MONEY TO
WOUNDED WARRIORS COMING OUT OF
SYRIA.
SO TURKEY'S HARDLY BEEN A
RELIABLE N.A.T.O. ALLY MEMBER IN
THE FIGHT AGAINST VIOLENT
EXTREMISM IN THE REGION.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHAT DOES
WARNED DO IN THIS INTERIM PER --
SO WHAT DOES ERDOGAN DO IN THIS
INTERIM PERIOD AS HE HAS THESE
FORCES WORKING AGAINST HIM, AS
HE SAYS.
HOW CAN HE PLACATE THE INTERESTS
OF THE WEST AND FIGURE OUT HOW
TO KEEP HIS NEIGHBORHOOD SAFE?
>> HE HAD A MOTTO PEACE AT HOME
AND ABROAD.
TURKEY HASN'T BEEN ABLE TO
REALIZE EITHER UNDER PRESIDENT
ERDOGAN.
RIGHT NOW THERE IS A MOMENT TO
PIVOT, TO FOCUS ON DOMESTIC
ISSUES INSTEAD OF CRACKING DOWN
ON INDEPENDENT AND CIVIL SOCIETY
TO REACTIVATE THE PEACE PROCESS
WITH TURKEY'S KURDS.
IF THEY'RE LOOKING FOR
INTERNATIONAL MEDIATORS, THERE
IS A HISTORY OF INTERNATIONAL
INVOLVEMENT DISCREETLY IN THIS
AREA.
SO RESOLVING THE KURDISH ISSUE
WOULD PUT TURKEY BACK ON THE
RIGHT TRACK, COORDINATING MORE
CLOSELY WITH THE U.S. AND THE
MULTI-NATIONAL COALITION AGAINST
I.S.I.S. WOULD ALSO BE A WISE
MOVE.
BUT ERDOGAN HAS HARDLY DISPLAYED
GOOD JUDGMENT WHEN IT COMES TO
CRITICAL DECISIONS AND IS LIKELY
TO TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY TO
CONSOLIDATE HIS DICTATORSHIP
WHICH WOULD MAKE TURKEY LESS
PRONE TO COOPERATION WITH THE
WEST AND LESS LIKELY TO
RECONCILE WITH ITS OWN CITIZENS.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY,
AMBASSADOR EDELMAN, REGARDLESS
OF WHAT ERDOGAN DOES IN REACTION
TO THE COUP THIS IS STILL A
COUNTRY N.A.T.O. AND THE U.S.
WILL CONTINUE TO RELY ON.
>> WELL, IN THE BEST OF ALL
POSSIBLE WORLDS, THAT'S TRUE,
HARI, BUT UNFORTUNATELY I HAVE
TO AGREE WITH WHAT DAVID JUST
SAID.
ONE WOULD HOPE THAT IT WOULD BE
POSSIBLE TO DO THE THINGS AND IT
WOULD BE IN TURKEY'S INTEREST
FOR ERDOGAN TO DO THE THINGS
THAT DAVID SUGGESTED AS AN
AGENDA POST-COUP, BUT THE EARLY
RETURN SUGGESTS THAT IS NOT THE
DIRECTION IN WHICH HE IS MOVING
AND I THINK DAVID'S CORRECT, I
THINK WE'RE GOING TO SEE A
PERIOD OF INTERNAL FOCUS,
RETRIBUTION AND A MOVEMENT AWAY
FROM THE KINDS OF ENGAGEMENT
WHERE NOT ONLY THE KURDISH
COMMUNITY BUT THE REST OF
TURKISH SOCIETY THAT MIGHT HELP
STABILIZE THE SITUATION SO I
THINK WE'RE IN FOR A PERIOD OF
UNSTABLIZATION IN TURKEY.
HOW FAR IT CAN GO, NO ONE KNOWS.
>> Sreenivasan: ERIC EDELMAN,
DAVID PHILLIPS, THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: SEE IMAGES FROM
TURKEY FOLLOWING LAST NIGHT'S
ATTEMPTED COUP.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: FRANCE BEGAN
THREE DAYS OF NATIONAL MOURNING
TODAY FOR THE VICTIMS OF
THURSDAY'S TERRORIST TRUCK
ATTACK IN THE RIVIERA RESORT
CITY OF NICE.
TODAY, ISIS CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY, SAYING THE
TUNISIAN MAN WHO DROVE THE LARGE
TRUCK WAS ONE OF ITS SOLDIERS,
HEEDING ITS CALL TO KILL
CITIZENS OF FRANCE AND OTHER
COUNTRIES FIGHTING THE MILITANT
GROUP.
BUT FRENCH AUTHORITIES HAVE NOT
CONFIRMED THE LINK.
THE DEATH TOLL STANDS AT 84,
AFTER THE TRUCK RAN OVER
PEDESTRIANS FOR A MILE-AND-A-
HALF ALONG NICE'S PROMENADE
FOLLOWING BASTILLE DAY
FIREWORKS.
OF MORE THAN 200 OTHER PEOPLE
WHO WERE INJURED, ABOUT 50
REMAIN HOSPITALIZED IN CRITICAL
CONDITION.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JANE
FERGUSON HAS MORE FROM NICE.
>> Reporter: SIGNS OF THE HORROR
ARE BEGINNING TO FADE FROM
NICE'S PROMENADE DES ANGES.
PARTS OF THIS ROUTE ALONG THE
FRENCH RIVIERA HAVE RE-OPENED,
AS TOURISTS AND LOCALS
CAUTIOUSLY RETURN TO A STREET
KNOWN FOR IT'S GLAMOUR, HISTORY,
AND NOW, TRAGEDY.
THERE ARE MORE POLICE AROUND,
AND MANY HAVE GATHERED TO MOURN
THE DEAD.
JUST TO GIVE YOU SOME
PERSPECTIVE-- NOW THAT THE
STREET HAS BEEN RE-OPENED, MANY
HAVE COME HERE TO LAY FLOWERS
AND CANDLES AT THE VARIOUS SPOTS
WHERE PEOPLE WERE KILLED.
SO ALL DOWN THIS STREET YOU CAN
SEE SMALL PILES OF FLOWERS WERE
EACH LIFE WAS LOST.
NICE HAS DRAWN VISITORS FOR
CENTURIES.
IT'S OLD WORLD STYLE AND BEAUTY
ARE STILL UNMISTAKABLE.
THAT'S WHY PHILIP FRAYNE AND HIS
WIFE CAME HERE FOR A HOLIDAY.
HE WORKS AT THE U.S. EMBASSY AND
LIVES IN PARIS.
THEY WERE ON THE PROMENADE JUST
A FEW MINUTES BEFORE THE
ATTACKER STRUCK.
HIS WIFE WANTED TO STAY AND
DANCE AT THE STREET PARTY, BUT
HE WANTED TO GO FOR DINNER.
>> HAD I TAKEN MY WIFE'S WISHES
AND STAYED TO DANCE AT THE TIME
WE PROBABLY WOULD HAVE BEEN
RIGHT IN THE CROSSFIRE, BUT WE
DECIDED TO GO GET A BITE TO EAT
FIRST, COME BACK TO DANCE LATER.
THAT MAY HAVE SAVED US.
>> Reporter: FROM A NEARBY
RESTAURANT THEY HEARD THE
ATTACK.
>> ONCE GUNSHOTS WERE HEARD THEN
WE ALL KNEW WE HAD TO GET INSIDE
AND WE HAD TO REMAIN LOW AND
THERE WERE A LOT OF PEOPLE
AMONGST US WHO WERE CRYING AND
WHO WERE VERY UPSET.
>> Reporter: OTHER AMERICANS
CAUGHT UP IN THE PANIC ARE STILL
MISSING.
20-YEAR-OLD BERKELEY STUDENT
NICOLAS LESLIE WAS AT THE SCENE
OF THE ATTACK AND HASN'T BEEN
SEEN SINCE.
HIS FAMILY IS DESPERATELY
TRYING TO FIND HIM.
A CALIFORNIA FAMILY IS TURNING
TO A FACEBOOK PAGE, "SOS NICE,"
TO HELP LOCATE WRITER RENEE LO
IACONO.
SHE WAS IN NICE THURSDAY NIGHT,
BUT HER FAMILY HAS NOT HEARD
FROM HER.
THE ATTACKER, SHOT DEAD BY
POLICE, 31-YEAR-OLD TUNISIAN
MOHAMED LAHOUAIEJ BOUHEL, WAS
NOT ON ANY FRENCH TERROR LISTS
OR KNOWN TO POLICE AS A RADICAL.
THE FRENCH INTERIOR MINISTER
SAID TODAY HE APPARENTLY
RADICALIZED VERY QUICKLY.
POLICE HAVE ARRESTED FIVE PEOPLE
INCLUDING HIS ESTRANGED WIFE.
THEY'RE TRYING TO FIND OUT IF
THE ATTACKER ACTED ALONE OR HAD
HELP FROM OTHER INDIVIDUALS.
HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW ARE
INVESTIGATORS GOING TO KNOW
WHETHER A GROUP PLANNED THIS
ATTACK OR TRAINED THE ATTACKER?
>> THEY'RE TRYING TO LOOK INTO
WHETHER THIS WAS A COORDINATED
ATTACK FROM ISIS.
WHAT'S CLEAR IS THE STATEMENT
THEY MADE TODAY SAID HE FOLLOWED
THE CALL.
THAT IS NOT SAYING THEY
COORDINATE THE ATTACK AND
PLANNED IT OUT.
FOR INSTANCE, THE PARIS ATTACK
IN NOVEMBER WHICH WAS CLEARLY
COORDINATED AND VERY MUCH SO
PLANNED INSIDE SYRIA, THIS
ATTACK MAY HAVE SIMPLY BEEN
INSPIRED BY I.S.I.S. WHICH IS
DIFFERENT BUT NO LESS DEADLY.
>> Sreenivasan: THANKS SO
MUCH, JANE FERGUSON, FROM NICE,
FRANCE.
POLICE IN PAKISTAN SAID TODAY
THAT A CONTROVERSIAL MODEL AND
SOCIAL MEDIA STAR HAS BEEN
STRANGLED TO DEATH IN HER HOME,
ALLEGEDLY BY HER OWN BROTHER.
A POLICE OFFICER SAID THE MURDER
OF QUANDEEL BALOCH WAS A SO-
CALLED "HONOR KILLING," CARRIED
OUT BY A RELATIVE TO PUNISH
FAMILY MEMBERS SEEN AS VIOLATING
CONSERVATIVE MUSLIM VALUES.
POLICE ARE SEARCHING FOR HER
BROTHER, WHO HAS DISAPPEARED.
BALOCH WAS WELL-KNOWN FOR
POSTING PROVOCATIVE PHOTOS ON
FACEBOOK AND OTHER SOCIAL MEDIA,
INCLUDING A RECENT SELFIE WITH A
PROMINENT MUSLIM CLERIC THAT
ANGERED RELIGIOUS LEADERS.
SHE SPOKE OF TRYING TO CHANGE
THE "TYPICAL ORTHODOX MINDSET"
OF PAKISTANIS.
THE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION OF
PAKISTAN SAYS MORE THAN 1,000
WOMEN DIED IN HONOR KILLINGS
THERE IN 2014.
ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
TOMORROW, OUR PREVIEW OF THE
REPUBLICAN NATIONAL CONVENTION
CONTINUES WITH A CLOSER LOOK AT
THE PRESUMPTIVE NOMINEE.
>> HE'S VERY GOOD AT TURNING
AROUND, WHAT THE REST OF US
WOULD SEE AS A DEFEAT INTO A
VICTORY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THE ISSUES
FACING THE REPUBLICAN PARTY.
ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SUNDAY.
FINALLY, SERVICES WERE HELD
TODAY IN FORT WORTH, TEXAS FOR
DALLAS POLICE OFFICER, THE LAST
OF THE FIVE OFFICERS GUNNED DOWN
IN THE JULY 7th SNIPER
SHOOTINGS.
A NAVY VETERAN WHO SPENT THREE
TOURS IN IRAQ WAS 32 YEARS OLD.
IF YOU MISSED IT, YOU CAN WATCH
LAST NIGHT'S SPECIAL PROGRAM
THAT FOLLOWED THE TRAGIC EVENTS
IN DALLAS, BATON ROUGE AND
ST. PAUL.
IT WAS CALLED AMERICA IN BLACK
AND BLUE, A PBS "NewsHour
WEEKEND" SPECIAL REPORT ONLINE
NOW AT PBS.org/"NewsHour".
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWS WEEKEND, I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN.
GOOD NIGHT.